there's a man out there somewhere who
looks a little bit like the actor Idris
Elba or at least he did 20 years ago I
don't know anything else about him
except that he once saved my life by
putting his own life in danger
this man ran across four lanes of
freeway traffic in the middle of the
night to bring me back to safety
after a car accident that could have
killed me and the whole thing left me
really shaken up obviously but it also
left me with this kind of burning
knowing need to understand why he did it
what forces within him caused him to
make the choice that I owe my life to to
risk his own life to save the life of a
stranger in other words what are the
causes of his or anybody else's capacity
for altruism but first let me tell you
what happened that night I was 19 years
old and driving back to my home in
Tacoma Washington down the interstate
five freeway when a little dog darted
out in front of my car and I did exactly
what you're not supposed to do which is
swerved to avoid it
and I discovered why you're not supposed
to do that I hit the dog anyways and
that lent the car into a fishtail and
then a spin across the freeway and so
finally it wound up in the fast lane of
the freeway facing backward into
oncoming traffic and then the engine
died and I was sure in that moment that
I was about to die too but I didn't
because of the actions of that one brave
man who must have made the decision
within a fraction of a second of seeing
my stranded car to pull over and run
across four lanes of freeway traffic in
the dark to save my life and then after
he got my car working again and got me
back to safety
and made sure I was going to be all
right he drove off again never even told
me his name and I'm pretty sure I forgot
to say thank you so before I go any
further I really want to take a moment
to stop and say
thank you to that stranger tell you all
this because the events of that night
changed the course of my life to some
degree I became a psychology researcher
and I've devoted my work to
understanding the human capacity to care
for others where does it come from and
how does it develop and what are the
extreme forms that it can take these
questions are really important to
understanding basic aspects of human
social nature a lot of people and this
includes everybody from philosophers and
economists ordinary people believe that
human nature is fundamentally selfish
there were only ever really motivated by
our own welfare but if that's true why
does some people like the stranger who
rescued me do selfless things like
helping other people an enormous risk
and cost to themselves answering this
question requires exploring the roots of
extraordinary acts of altruism and what
might make people who engage in such
acts different than other people but
until very recently very little work on
this topic had been done the actions of
the man who rescued me made the most
stringent definition of altruism which
is a voluntary costly behavior motivated
by the desire to help another individual
so it's a selfless act intended to
benefit only the other what could
possibly explain an action like that one
answer is compassion obviously which is
a key driver of altruism but then the
question becomes why do some people seem
to have more of it than others and the
answer may be that the brains of highly
altruistic people are different in
fundamental ways but to figure out how I
actually started from the opposite end
with Psychopaths
a common approach to understanding basic
aspects of human nature like the desire
to help other people is to study people
and whom that desire is missing and
Psychopaths are exactly such a group
psychopathy is a developmental disorder
the strongly genetic origins and it
results in a personality that's cold and
uncaring
and a tendency to engage in antisocial
and sometimes very violent behavior once
my colleagues and I at the National
Institute of Mental Health conducted
some of the first-ever brain imaging
research with psychopathic adolescents
and our findings and the findings of
other researchers now have shown that
people who are psychopathic pretty
reliably exhibit three characteristics
first although they're not generally
insensitive to other people's emotions
they are insensitive to science that
other people are in distress and in
particular they have difficulty
recognizing fearful facial expressions
like this one and fearful expressions
convey urgent need and emotional
distress and they usually elicit
compassion and a desire to help in
people who see them so it makes sense
that people who tend to lack compassion
also tend to be insensitive to these
cues the part of the brain that's the
most important for recognizing fearful
expressions is called the amygdala there
are very rare cases of people who lack
amygdala is completely and they're
profoundly impaired in recognizing
fearful expressions and whereas healthy
adults and children usually show big
spikes and amygdala activity when they
look at fearful expressions psychopaths
amygdalas are under reactive to these
expressions sometimes they don't react
at all which may be why they have
trouble detecting these cues finally
Psychopaths amygdalas are smaller than
average by about eighteen or twenty
percent so all of these findings are
reliable and robust and they're very
interesting but remember that my main
interest is not understanding why people
don't care about others it's
understanding why they do so the real
question is could extraordinary altruism
which is the opposite of psychopathy in
terms of compassion and a desire to help
other people emerge from a brain that is
also the opposite of psychopathy sort of
anti psychopathic brain better able to
recognize other people's fear an
amygdala that's more reactive to this
expression and maybe larger than average
as well as my research has now shown all
three things are true and we discovered
this by testing a population of truly
extraordinary altruists these are people
who have given one of their own kid
to a complete stranger so these are
people who have volunteered to undergo
major surgery so that one of their own
healthy kidneys can be removed and
transplanted into a very ill estranged
er that they've never met and may never
meet why would anybody do this as a very
common question and the answer may be
that the brains of these extraordinary
altruists have certain special
characteristics they are better at
recognizing other people's fear they're
literally better detecting when somebody
else is in distress
this may be in part because their
amygdala is more reactive to these
expressions and remember this is the
same part of the brain that we found was
under reactive and people who are
psychopathic and finally their amygdalas
are larger than average as well by about
8% so together what these data suggest
is the existence of something like a
caring continuum in the world that's
anchored at the one end by people who
were highly psychopathic and at the
other by people who were very
compassionate and driven to acts of
extreme altruism but I should add that
what makes extraordinary altruists so
different it's not just that they're
more compassionate than average they are
but what's even more unusual about them
is that they're compassionate and
altruistic not just towards people who
were in their own inner most circle of
friends and family right because to have
compassion for people that you love and
identify with is not some extraordinary
truly extraordinary altruists compassion
extends way beyond that circle even
beyond their wider circle of
acquaintances do people who are outside
their social circle altogether total
strangers just like the man who rescued
me and I've had the opportunity now to
ask a lot of altruistic kidney donors
how it is that they manage to generate
such a wide circle of compassion that
they're willing to give a complete
stranger their kidney and I found it's a
really difficult question for them to
answer I say you know how is it that you
were willing to do this thing and so
many other people don't you're one of
fewer than 2000 Americans who's ever
given a kidney to a stranger what is it
that makes you so special and what do
they say they say
nothing there's nothing special about me
I'm just the same as everybody else and
I think that's actually a really telling
answer because it suggests that the
circles of these altruists don't look
like this they look more like this
they have no center these alturas
literally don't think of themselves as
being at the center of anything as being
better or more inherently important than
anybody else
when I asked one Alturas why donating
her kidney made sense to her she said
because it's not about me another said
I'm not different I'm not unique your
study here is going to find out that I'm
just the same as you I think the best
description for this amazing lack of
self-centeredness is humility which is
that quality that in the words of st.
Augustine makes men as angels and why is
that it's because if there's no center
of your circle there can be no inner
rings or outer rings nobody who's more
or less worthy of your care and
compassion than anybody else and I think
that this is what really distinguishes
extraordinary altruists from the average
person but I also think that this is a
view of the world that's attainable by
many and maybe even most people and I
think this because of the societal level
expansions of altruism and compassion
are already happening everywhere the
psychologist Steven Pinker and others
have shown that all around the world
people are becoming less and less
accepting of suffering and ever widening
circles of others which has led to
declines at all kinds of cruelty and
violence from animal abuse to domestic
violence to capital punishment and it's
led to increases in all kinds of
altruism a hundred years ago people
would have thought it was ludicrous how
normal and ordinary it is for people to
donate their blood and bone marrow to
complete strangers to that is it
possible that a hundred years from now
people will think that donating a kidney
to a stranger is just as normal and
ordinary as we think donating blood and
bone marrow is today maybe so what's at
the root of all these amazing changes in
part it seems to be increases in wealth
and standards of living
as societies become wealthier and better
off people seem to turn their focus of
attention outward and as a result all
kinds of altruism toward strangers
increases from volunteering to
charitable donations and even altruistic
kidney donations but all of these
changes also yield a sort of strange and
paradoxical result which is that even as
the world is becoming a better and more
humane place which it is there's a very
common perception that it's becoming
worse and more cruel which it's not and
I don't know exactly why this is but I
think it may be that we now just know so
much more about the suffering of
strangers and distant places and so we
now care a lot more about the suffering
of those distant strangers but what's
clear is the kinds of changes we're
seeing show that the roots of altruism
and compassion are just as much a part
of human nature as cruelty and violence
maybe even more so and while some people
do seem to be inherently more sensitive
to the suffering of distant others I
really believe that the ability to
remove oneself from the center of the
circle and expand the circle of
compassion outward to include even
strangers is within reach for almost
everyone thank